# Thomas Calculus
## Chapter 11 Parametric Equations and Polar Coordinates
### 11.1 Parametrizations of Plane Curves
#### Finding Cartesian from Parametric Equations
Exercises 1–18 give parametric equations and parameter intervals for the motion of a particle in the $xy$-plane. Identify the particle’s path by finding a Cartesian equation for it. Graph the Cartesian equation. (The graphs will vary with the equation used.) Indicate the portion of the graph traced by the particle and the direction of motion.
1. $x = 3t, y = 9t^2, -\infty < t < \infty$   
   $y = x^2$ 
#### Finding Parametric Equations
29. Find parametric equations and a parameter interval for the motion of a particle that starts at $(a, 0)$ and traces the circle $x^2 + y^2 = a^2$  
a. once clockwise.  
b. once counterclockwise.  
c. twice clockwise.  
d. twice counterclockwise.  
(There are many ways to do these, so your answers may not be the same as the ones in the back of the book.)  
a. $x = a\cos\theta, y =-a\sin\theta, 0 \le \theta \le 2\pi$  
b. $x = a\cos\theta, y =a\sin\theta, 0 \le \theta \le 2\pi$  
c. $x = a\cos\theta, y =-a\sin\theta, 0 \le \theta \le 4\pi$  
b. $x = a\cos\theta, y =a\sin\theta, 0 \le \theta \le 4\pi$ 
#### Distance Using Parametric Equations
49. Find the point on the parabola $x = t, y = t^2, -\infty < t < \infty$ closest to the point $(2, \dfrac{1}{2})$. (Hint: Minimize the square of the distance as a function of $t$.)  
    $d = \sqrt{(t-2)^2 + (t^2 - \dfrac{1}{2})^2}$  
    $= \sqrt{t^4 -4t + \dfrac{17}{4}}$  
    $D = d^2 = t^4 -4t + \dfrac{17}{4}$  
    $\dfrac{dD}{dt} = 4t^3 - 4 = 0, t = 1$  
    $(1,1)$
#### GRAPHER EXPLORATIONS
If you have a parametric equation grapher, graph the equations over the given intervals in Exercises 51–58.

51. Ellipse $x = 4 \cos t, y = 2 \sin t$, over   
a. $0 \le t \le 2\pi$  
b. $0 \le t \le \pi$  
c. $-\dfrac{\pi}{2} \le t \le \dfrac{\pi}{2}$
### 11.2 Calculus with Parametric Curves
#### Tangents to Parametrized Curves
In Exercises 1–14, find an equation for the line tangent to the curve at the point defined by the given value of $t$. Also, find the value of $\dfrac{d^2y}{dx^2}$ at this point.
1. $x = 2 \cos t, y = 2 \sin t, t = \dfrac{\pi}{4}$   
   $\dfrac{dy}{dx} = \dfrac{2\cos t}{-2\sin t} = -\cot t$  
   $t= \dfrac{\pi}{4}, (\sqrt{2},\sqrt{2})$  
   $y = -x + 2\sqrt{2}$  
   $\dfrac{d^2y}{dx^2} = \dfrac{\csc^2t}{-2\sin t} = -\sqrt{2}$
#### Implicitly Defined Parametrizations
Assuming that the equations in Exercises 15–20 define $x$ and $y$ implicitly as differentiable functions $x = f(t), y = g(t)$, find the slope of the curve $x = f(t), y = g(t)$ at the given value of $t$.

15. $x^3 + 2t^2 = 9, 2y^3 - 3t^2 = 4, t = 2$  
    $3x^2\dfrac{dx}{dt} + 4t = 0$  
    $\dfrac{dx}{dt} = -\dfrac{4t}{3x^2}$  
    $6y^2\dfrac{dy}{dt} - 6t = 0$  
    $\dfrac{dy}{dt} = \dfrac{t}{y^2}$  
    $\dfrac{dy}{dx} = \dfrac{\frac{t}{y^2}}{-\frac{4t}{3x^2}} = -\dfrac{3x^2}{4y^2}$  
    $t = 2, x^3 = 1, x^2 = 1, y^3 =8, y^2 = 4$ 
    $\dfrac{dy}{dx} = -\dfrac{3}{16}$
#### Area
21. Find the area under one arch of the cycloid 
    $$
    x = a(t - \sin t), y = a(1 - \cos t)
    $$ 
    $S = \int_0^{2a\pi}y(t)dx$  
    $\dfrac{dx}{dt} =a - a\cos t$  
    $S = \int_0^{2a\pi}a(1-\cos t)a(1-\cos t)dt$  
    $= a^2\int_0^{2a\pi}(1-\cos t)^2dt$  
    $= a^2\int_0^{2a\pi}(1-2\cos t + \dfrac{1 + \cos 2t}{2})dt$  
    $= a^2[\dfrac{3}{2}t - 2\sin t + \dfrac{1}{4}\sin 2t]_0^{2a\pi}$  
    $= a^2(3a\pi -2\sin 2a\pi + \dfrac{1}{4}\sin 4a\pi)$  
#### Lengths of Curves
Find the lengths of the curves in Exercises 25–30.

25. $x = \cos t, y = t + \sin t, 0 \le t \le \pi$  
    $l = \int_0^{\pi}\sqrt{\sin^2t + 1 + 2\cos t + \cos^2t}dt$  
    $= \int_0^{\pi}\sqrt{2+ 2\cos t}dt$  
    $= \int_0^{\pi}\sqrt{4\cos^2\dfrac{t}{2}}dt$    
    $= \int_0^{\pi}2\cos \dfrac{t}{2}dt$  
    $= 2[2\sin \dfrac{t}{2}]_0^{\pi}$  
    $= 4$
#### Surface Area
Find the areas of the surfaces generated by revolving the curves in Exercises 31–34 about the indicated axes.

31. $x = \cos t, y = 2 + \sin t, 0 \le t \le 2\pi; x$-axis  
    $S = \int_0^{2\pi}2\pi(2 + \sin t)\sqrt{\sin^2t + \cos^2t}dt$  
    $= 2\pi\int_0^{2\pi}2 + \sin tdt$  
    $= 2\pi [2t -\cos t]_0^{2\pi}$  
    $= 2\pi(4\pi -1 +1)$  
    $= 8\pi^2$
#### Centroids
37. Find the coordinates of the centroid of the curve $x = \cos t + t \sin t, y = \sin t - t \cos t, 0 \le t \le \dfrac{\pi}{2}$.  
    $dm = \sqrt{(-\sin t + t\cos t + \sin t)^2 + (\cos t - (-t\sin t +\cos t))^2}dt$  
    $= \sqrt{t^2 \cos^2t + t^2\sin^2t}dt$  
    $= tdt$  
    $M = \int_0^{\frac{\pi}{2}}tdt= \dfrac{\pi^2}{8}$  
    $M_x = \int_0^{\frac{\pi}{2}}(\sin t -t\cos t)tdt$  
    $= \int_0^{\frac{\pi}{2}}t\sin t -t^2\cos tdt$  
    Let $u(t) = t^2, v'(t) = \cos t$  
    $u'(t) = 2t, v(t) = \sin t$   
    $\int t^2\cos tdt$  
    $= t^2\sin t - \int2t\sin tdt$   
    $=  t^2\sin t -2(\sin t -t\cos t)$   
    $M_x = [3(\sin t -t\cos t) - t^2\sin t]_0^{\frac{\pi}{2}}$  
    $= 3-\dfrac{\pi^2}{4}$    
    $M_y = \int_0^{\frac{\pi}{2}}(\cos t + t\sin t)tdt$  
    Let $u(t) = t^2, v'(t) = \sin t$  
    $u'(t) = 2t, v(t) = -\cos t$   
    $\int t^2\cos tdt$  
    $= -t^2\cos t +2(\cos t + t\sin t)$  
    $M_y = [3(\cos t + t\sin t) -t^2\cos t]_0^{\frac{\pi}{2}}$  
    $= \dfrac{3\pi}{2}-3$  
    $\bar{x} = \dfrac{M_y}{M} = \dfrac{12}{\pi} - \dfrac{24}{\pi^2}$  
    $\bar{y} = \dfrac{M_x}{M} = \dfrac{24}{\pi^2}-2$   
    $(\dfrac{12}{\pi} - \dfrac{24}{\pi^2},\dfrac{24}{\pi^2}-2)$
#### Theory and Examples
1.  Length is independent of parametrization. To illustrate the fact that the numbers we get for length do not depend on the way we parametrize our curves (except for the mild restrictions preventing doubling back mentioned earlier), calculate the length of the semicircle $y = \sqrt{1 - x^2}$ with these two different parametrizations:  
a. $x = \cos 2t, y = \sin 2t, 0 \le t \le \dfrac{\pi}{2}$.  
b. $x = \sin \pi t, y = \cos \pi t, -\dfrac{1}{2} \le t \le \dfrac{1}{2}$  
a. $L = \int_0^{\frac{\pi}{2}}\sqrt{4\sin^22t + 4\cos^22t}dt$  
$= \int_0^{\frac{\pi}{2}}\sqrt{4\sin^22t + 4\sin^22t}dt$  
$= 2t]_0^{\frac{\pi}{2}} = \pi$  
b.$L = \int_{-\frac{1}{2}}^{\frac{1}{2}}\sqrt{\pi^2\sin^2\pi t + \pi^2\cos^2\pi t}dt$  
$= \pi t]_{-\frac{1}{2}}^{\frac{1}{2}} = \pi$
#### COMPUTER EXPLORATIONS
In Exercises 51–54, use a CAS to perform the following steps for the given curve over the closed interval.  
a. Plot the curve together with the polygonal path approximations for $n = 2, 4, 8$ partition points over the interval. (See Figure 11.16.)  
b. Find the corresponding approximation to the length of the curve by summing the lengths of the line segments.  
c. Evaluate the length of the curve using an integral. Compare your approximations for $n = 2, 4, 8$ with the actual length given by the integral. How does the actual length compare with the approximations as $n$ increases? Explain your answer.

51. $x = \dfrac{1}{3}t^3, y = \dfrac{1}{2}t^2, 0 \le t \le 1$  
    $n = 2, (\dfrac{1}{24},\dfrac{1}{8}),(\dfrac{1}{3},\dfrac{1}{2})$  
    $L = \sqrt{\dfrac{1}{144} + \dfrac{1}{64}} +\sqrt{\dfrac{1}{16} + \dfrac{9}{64}}$  
    $= \dfrac{\sqrt{10}}{24} + \dfrac{\sqrt{13}}{8}$  
    $L = \int_0^1\sqrt{t^4 + t^2}dt$  
### 11.3 Polar Coordinates
#### Polar Coordinates
1. Which polar coordinate pairs label the same point?  
a. $(3, 0)$ b. $(-3, 0)$ c. $(2, \dfrac{2}{3}\pi)$  
d. $(2, \dfrac{7}{3}\pi)$ e. $(-3, \pi)$ f. $(2, \dfrac{1}{3}\pi)$  
g. $(-3, 2\pi)$ h. $(-2, -\dfrac{1}{3}\pi)$   
a and e, b and g, c and h, d and f  
#### Polar to Cartesian Coordinates
5. Find the Cartesian coordinates of the points in Exercise 1.   
   a. $(3,0)$ b. $(-3,0)$ c. $(-1,\sqrt{3}$, d $(1,\sqrt{3})$  
#### Cartesian to Polar Coordinates
7. Find the polar coordinates, $0 \le \theta \le 2\pi$ and $r \ge 0$, of the following points given in Cartesian coordinates.  
a. $(1, 1)$ b. $(-3, 0)$    
c. $(\sqrt{3},-1)$d. $(-3, 4)$  
a. $(\sqrt{2},\dfrac{\pi}{4})$  b. $(-3,0)$  
c. $(2,\dfrac{5}{3}\pi)$ d. $(5,\pi - \arctan\dfrac{4}{3})$      
#### Graphing Sets of Polar Coordinate Points
Graph the sets of points whose polar coordinates satisfy the equations and inequalities in Exercises 11–26.

11. $r = 2$
#### Polar to Cartesian Equations
Replace the polar equations in Exercises 27–52 with equivalent Cartesian equations. Then describe or identify the graph.

27. $r \cos \theta = 2$  
    $\dfrac{x}{r}r = 2$  
    $x = 2$  
## Cartesian to Polar Equations
Replace the Cartesian equations in Exercises 53–66 with equivalent polar equations.

53. $x = 7$  
    $r\cos \theta = 7$
### 11.4  Graphing Polar Coordinate Equations
#### Symmetries and Polar Graphs
Identify the symmetries of the curves in Exercises 1–12. Then sketch the curves in the $xy$-plane.

1. $r = 1 + \cos \theta$  
   around the $x$ axis
#### Slopes of Polar Curves in the $xy$-Plane
Find the slopes of the curves in Exercises 17–20 at the given points. Sketch the curves along with their tangents at these points.

17. cardioid $r = -1 + \cos \theta, \theta = \dfrac{\pi}{2}$  
    $\dfrac{dy}{dx} = \dfrac{-\sin^2\theta  - \cos\theta + \cos^2 \theta}{-\sin\theta\cos\theta + \sin\theta - \sin\theta\cos\theta}$  
    $= \dfrac{\cos2\theta - \cos\theta}{\sin\theta-\sin2\theta}$  
    $\dfrac{dy}{dx}|_{(-1,\frac{\pi}{2})} = -1$
#### Concavity of Polar Curves in the $xy$-Plane
Equation (1) gives the formula for the derivative $y'$ of a polar curve $r = f(\theta)$. The second derivative is $\dfrac{d^2y}{dx^2} = \dfrac{\frac{dy'}{d\theta}}{\frac{dx}{d\theta}}$ (see Equation (2) in Section 11.2). Find the slope and concavity of the curves in Exercises 21–24 at the given points.

21. $r = \sin \theta, \theta = \dfrac{\pi}{6}, \dfrac{\pi}{3}$  
    $\dfrac{dy}{dx} = \dfrac{\cos\theta\sin\theta + \cos\theta\sin\theta}{\cos^2\theta - \sin^2\theta} = \tan2\theta$  
    $\dfrac{dy}{dx}|_{(\frac{1}{2},\frac{\pi}{6})} =\sqrt{3}$  
    $\dfrac{dy}{dx}|_{(\frac{\sqrt{3}}{2},\frac{\pi}{3})} =-\sqrt{3}$  
    $\dfrac{d^2y}{dx^2} =\dfrac{2\sec^22\theta}{-\sin\theta}$  
    $\dfrac{d^2y}{dx^2}|_{(\frac{1}{2},\frac{\pi}{6})} =-\dfrac{8}{\frac{1}{2}} = -16$, concave down  
    $\dfrac{d^2y}{dx^2}|_{(\frac{\sqrt{3}}{2},\frac{\pi}{3})} =-\dfrac{8}{\frac{\sqrt{3}}{2}} = -\dfrac{16\sqrt{3}}{3}$,concave down
#### Graphing Limaçons
Graph the limaçons in Exercises 25–28. Limaçon (“lee-ma-sahn”) is Old French for “snail.” You will understand the name when you graph the limaçons in Exercise 25. Equations for limaçons have the form $r = a\plusmn b \cos \theta$ or $r = a \plusmn b \sin \theta$. There are four basic shapes.

25. Limaçons with an inner loop  
a. $r =\dfrac{1}{2} +\cos\theta$ b.  $r =\dfrac{1}{2} +\sin\theta$
#### Graphing Polar Regions and Curves in the xy-Plane
29. Sketch the region deifned by the inequalities $-1 \le r \le 2$ and  $-\dfrac{\pi}{2} \le \theta \le \dfrac{\pi}{2}$